# Offend

## Author
(c) 2021 VigilantDoomer

## Description

Offend is a program to generate random passphrases using a
wordlist and a source of randomness, such as cryptographic
pseudo random number of generator your operating system
provides, or by throwing dice. In the latter case, you need
real world dice, and the program will instruct you to throw
the dice, type the side you got, and repeat it until it is
able to generate the passphrase with the given properties
(desired entropy or number of words).

It is thus similar to diceware Python program, which in turn
is merely an electronic implementation of diceware protocol
by Arnold G. Reinhold (which was originally intended to
operate on dice only, hence the name of 'diceware'). 

Offend has different defaults from diceware program, however:

1. It uses default minimum entropy of 77.5 rather than 6 
words. This minimum is equivalent to generating 6 words
with a dictionary containing 7776 words, all of which are
unique, and no word is a prefix of another. This approach
guards against choosing wordlists with fewer amount of 
UNIQUE words, such as those with 4000 unique words repeated
twice for use with 20-sided dice, as that setup may confuse
the user to think they have entropy worth of 8000 words, but
they don't.

2. It will warn user if the chosen dictionary contains words
that are prefixes of other words, or if dictionary contains
repeated words. It will do so by printing dictionary stats
even if verbosity parameter was not passed (with verbosity,
dictionary stats will be printed even for dictionaries without
any caveats). Note that duplicated words might be NOT a problem
if every word is repeated exactly the same amount of time
as any other (the distribution is fair), and the user supplies
an entropy target rather than a "number of words in passphrase"
target.

3. The wordlists distributed with the program DO include SWEAR
and OFFENSIVE words for better memorability, however you do not
have to use them, and can use any wordlist supported by diceware
program. As the result of this difference, the default wordlists,
with exceptions of en_eff.txt (which is Electronic Frontier
Foundation's large wordlist, <https://www.eff.org/dice>) and 
offend_scrap.txt, have better entropy per character and generate
shorter passphrases on average, which is significant for when
you need higher amount of words (and 6 words of 7776-word list
is rather weak per my standards, you would want 10 words of
7776-word list to reach entropy of 128 bits).

## Rationale

When I first stumbled upon EFF's wordlists for passphrase
generation, I misread their reasoning about compiling these
wordlists to INCLUDE offensive and rare words rather than 
EXCLUDE them. I figured that offensive and rare words would
work better for remembering passphrases. Upon experiments,
I also discovered that:

1. As a non-native English speaker, the vocabulary in EFF
wordlists contains words unknown to me, and those I could
easily misspell. What is average native English speaker is
able to get without mistakes is of no relevance to me.

2. The passphrases generated by it are long, hard to memorize,
especially if number of words greater than 6 words are used,
and since the only time I would want to hold a passphrase or
password in my head is for encrypted disks, my use case for
strong protection exactly requires high entropy and rather
large amount of words.

3. Approach to use ONLY swear/offensive words fails, because
I don't know too many, which results in even longer 
passphrases for a given entropy, as both words are longer on
average (one needs to avoid words that are prefixes of others),
and more words are needed (the dictionary is smaller). I still
include the dictionary with high ratio of offensive words,
but it is only 1728 words, and the only good thing about it is
3 throws of 12-sided dice per word.

4. Mixing three languages (but limited to English characters) 
in a wordlist is awesome, and Russian language stands by its
own for having lots of short words. Try "offend_trilingual",
"offend_trimini", "offend_trimedium", "offend_triweak"
and "offend_ru" (the latter if you know Russian language). For
trilingual dictionaries, just treat the generated passphrases
as incantations - try remember how the words are written, not
think about how you say them. offend_trilingual, in particular,
reaches 128 bits with only 9 words, not 10 - remember that
typing a passphrase for encrypted disk is something some of us
have to do DAILY before they can boot and log in into their 
operating system.

Important note: you do NOT have to use dictionaries with 
offensive words, you can use any dictionary you want, if its 
format is supported. Offend supports the same formats that 
diceware program supports. From Offend, you get the benefit 
that it will check your dictionary for any abnormalities
that could have made you generate a weaker passphrase than
you intended. If you didn't pass the verbose parameter, but
Offend prints more than just a generated passphrase, it wants 
you to pay attention.

## License
Offend is free software: you can redistribute it
and/or modify it under the terms of GNU General Public License
as published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of
the License, or (at your option) any later version.

Offend is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with Offend (see file COPYING.txt). If not, see
<https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

The same license applies to packaged dictionaries.

## Plans

1. Document which dictionaries/technologies were used for 
generating the "offend_*" ones. While I did ensure that the resulting
dictionaries can be placed under GPLv3, _some_ of them could use a 
permissive license.

2. Cover more of a program with tests to ensure program meets the
security promises.

3. Implement more features, as some features of Diceware are currently
absent, and some original features might be desired, too.

4. Write my own introduction to the concept of passphrases, as well
as document the program better.

## Usage

```
Usage: offend {-options}

  -c, --caps                  Capitalize words. (default true)
  -d, --delimiter string      Separate words by delimiter. Empty string by default
  -e, --entropy float         Desired entropy, in bits. (default 77.5)
  -f, --faces int             Number of faces/sides of dice, when "realdice" is used as source. (default 6)
  -l, --list                  List all the available wordlists which can be passed to -w (--wordlist) parameter
  -n, --num int               Number of words to concatenate.
  -r, --randomsource string   Get randomness from this source. Possible values: "realdice", "system". (default "system")
  -v, --verbose count         Be verbose. Use several times for increased verbosity.
  -w, --wordlist string       Use words from this wordlist. (default "offend_fast")


```

## Website / contact information

You can contact me (the developer) through a forum:
<https://thegreatresist.freeforums.net>
username: vigilantdoomer displayname: Vigilante

And of course you can open an issue on github.
